docs: add ADR 029 Fibre upload rate limiting (#7571)
celestiaorg/celestia-app: docs/architecture/adr-029-fibre-upload-rate-limit.md

Reviewer: overall nit: we could switch to long lines instead of returning the line manually. It makes it easier to read and follow the document IMO

Reviewer: another thing is the document could use a few more articles between words and more explanations. It's too concise right now that it's not easy to read

- **On-chain rate (governance parameter — recommended).** Because uniformity is a quorum requirement, the rate should be a governance parameter. An `x/fibre` module parameter guarantees every validator uses the same value by construction, instead of relying on operators to coordinate local config where one lagging or misconfigured validator can deny quorum. Promoting it is a normal versioned-upgrade module change, not a fork, and enforcement still lives in the off-chain server. The trade-off is tuning speed, but routine tuning of the rate is not urgent, and the emergency path — disabling locally — stays local and is quorum-safe. burst derives from the rate, so it follows automatically; only the enable flag needs to be local. The recommendation is to make the rate a gov parameter from v1; coordinated local config is acceptable only as a ramp-up bridge (no users yet, low quorum risk) with a commitment to promote.

The consensus-critical kind of limiter, inside `PrepareProposal` / `ProcessProposal` and required to be deterministic across validators, is out of scope.

## Alternative Approaches

> The chosen design is Model 1 as the base, optional Model 4 for fairness, reject-fast with a short bounded queue.

Author: Good catch. fixed. The intro line was left over from an earlier revision where the queue was the decision

## Detailed Design

### What happens on an upload

For each `UploadShard` request the server:

1. Verifies the payment promise, the assignment, and the shard rows (`verifyPromise`, `verifyAssignment`, `verifyShard` in `fibre/server_upload.go`). A failure here returns an error, unchanged from today.
2. Checks whether the shard is already stored. If it is (a replay), the server returns OK and stops. It does not spend tokens.
3. Otherwise, takes `UploadSize` tokens from the bucket. If there are not enough, it rejects with `ResourceExhausted` and a retry-after hint.
4. Stores the shard and signs.

> The token charge sits between step 2 and step 4, so a replay never drains the bucket, and only shards that actually reach disk are charged.

Author: Good catch. The design now reserves rather than spends.

- Max charged blob: `UploadSize = 4096 × 32 KiB = 128 MiB` (this is `MaxBlobSize`).
- Max stored shard: `MaxShardSize = 129.83 MiB`, the 128 MiB of rows plus 1.83 MiB of overhead (proofs `4096 × 448 B`, RLC `4096 × 16 B`, indices `4096 × 4 B`). That is the ~1.4% gap between charged and stored bytes.

A worked rate. Take a disk budget of 1 TiB. The target burst dominates the floor, so `rate = 2 × 1 TiB / (3 × 4h) ≈ 48.5 MiB/s` and `burst = 1 TiB / 3 ≈ 341 GiB`. Peak charged bytes stay at 1 TiB, and the operator provisions about `1.014 TiB` of disk plus headroom. No budget is fixed yet, so the number is still open; whatever it is, `rate = (budget − burst) / window` with `burst = max(128 MiB, rate × window / 2)`.

### Consensus impact

All five models run off-chain. The limiter lives in the Fibre server, outside the ABCI state machine, and only decides which uploads a validator accepts and signs. It does not touch block validity or determinism: validators with different settings still agree on every block and differ only in what they choose to sign. Two things do interact with consensus.

> - **Quorum.** `MsgPayForFibre` is settled on-chain against signatures from more than `2/3` of validators (`x/fibre/keeper/msg_server.go`). The limiter does not change that rule, but throttling can stop a client from reaching `2/3` and fail its settlement. That is why the rate must be the same for every validator: if some run a lower rate, they reject blobs others accept, and the client loses quorum through no fault of its own.

Author: Fixed.  Quorum now reads "more than 2/3 of voting power

We want this for two reasons. In the near term it lets us run Fibre on mainnet during the 2026 ramp-up without a surprise in disk usage. In the long term validators run on fixed hardware and do not autoscale, so a disk bound is always useful. This is a permanent mechanism, not a throwaway guard.

One question stays open: what should the limiter meter, and at what scope? There are five candidates, referred to by number below:

1. **Global throughput** — one flat charge per upload, the same for every validator.
2. **Shard size × stake** — charge each validator for the bytes it actually stores.
3. **PFF (PayForFibre) size × stake** — a flat charge, but a per-validator budget scaled by stake.
4. **Per client / escrow / signer** — a second limit keyed on who is paying.
5. **Occupancy gating** — admit based on how full the store is right now, not on a token rate.

> Choosing the actual number is a separate question, handled in Sizing.

Reviewer: Reminder for ourselves to create an issue to pick a number once the rate limiter is implemented

- **The charge is the blob size.** `UploadSize` (`fibre/blob.go`) is the padded blob size, the same for every validator. It counts only the blob's rows. A validator stores a little more than its share of that: it also keeps per-row proofs, the RLC vector, and row indices. So its disk per blob is roughly `min(1, 3s) × MaxShardSize`, with a `MinRowsPerValidator` floor for small validators, and at most one full shard.
- **A client needs a quorum.** A client uploads to every validator and needs signatures covering at least `2/3` of stake to settle on-chain. Its client library (`ClientCache.Request` in `fibre/internal/grpc/client_cache.go`) does not retry application errors. So a rejection must not silently cost the client its quorum.

### Requirements

- **R1** — Bound each node's disk to a budget we can derive, not guess, over the retention window.
- **R2** — New clients or heavier usage must not break correctness or force a redesign. Fairness between clients is nice to have, but separate.
- **R3** — Keep the `>2/3` quorum reachable while the limiter is throttling.

> - **R4** — Keep it simple: config-gated, tunable, removable, no protocol change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **R4** — Keep it simple: config-gated, tunable, removable.
```

Probably remove the `no protocol` because we will have the gov param

### Out of scope

Two nearby things are excluded. The first is limiting throughput inside block production (`PrepareProposal` / `ProcessProposal`). That path writes to goleveldb, so any limit there is a goleveldb problem, and reworking it is not near-term. It may come back if goleveldb is revisited. The second is the read path (`DownloadShard`), which never grows the store.

## Decision

### Sizing — pick a disk budget, derive the rate

We do not choose the rate directly. We choose how much disk a validator should spend on Fibre, and the rate follows. That way we tune disk itself, which is what we care about.

Start with the bucket. Over any period `T` it admits at most `burst + rate × T` bytes. A shard lives for one retention window before it is pruned, so at steady state a top-stake validator holds at most:

> > `peak = burst + rate × window`

Reviewer 2: Not sure if formala is necessary. It can be used, but then server would need to maintain state of counter in durable way, to allow consistency between restarts. As of now rate counter will forget values over restart / crash. Given one of the goals is cap usage of disk to some predicatable value, It seems it can be derrived directly from file system. Like query folder size on startup and then have updown counter that moves up with uploads and down with pruning

## Detailed Design

### What happens on an upload

For each `UploadShard` request the server:

1. Verifies the payment promise, the assignment, and the shard rows (`verifyPromise`, `verifyAssignment`, `verifyShard` in `fibre/server_upload.go`). A failure here returns an error, unchanged from today.
2. Checks whether the shard is already stored. If it is (a replay), the server returns OK and stops. It does not spend tokens.
3. Otherwise, reserves `UploadSize` tokens from the bucket. If there are not enough, it rejects with `ResourceExhausted` and a retry-after hint.

> 4. Stores the shard and signs. If the store fails, it refunds the reserved tokens (`rate.Reservation.Cancel`) and returns the error.

Reviewer 2: One of the issues I would like to raise is how payments promises are handled for rejected submits. Given that clients sends valid payment promise, they could be paying even if validators are not capable of processing submits. Given that rate limitter is not normal mode it might be fine, but it needs to be explicitly written to anchor expectations.

If we choose to use model 5, it can be simpler to solve. Server can expose endpoint that can reply with available capacity, so during high utilisation clients can know ahead of time if there will be room before sending upload requests. This api would be useful for debugging and utilisation observability.

Reviewer: We could have the metrics API for this even using the current approach. We just check how many tokens are left in the bucket and return it in the API.

We can update the ADR to include this endpoint as a FLUP

- **Metrics.** Add two counters under the existing `fibre.server.upload_shard.` namespace (`fibre/server_metrics.go`): `rate_limited` (labeled by reason) and `admitted_bytes`. The existing `fibre.server.upload_shard.bytes` counts stored shard-row bytes on the success path, which is not the same as the charged `UploadSize`.
- **Off switch.** A no-op when disabled or when the derived rate is not positive.

### Transport-level limits

The rate limiter bounds disk, not memory. gRPC reads a whole `UploadShard` message into memory (up to `MaxMessageSize`, about 132 MiB: the 129.83 MiB shard plus the promise and ~2% protobuf framing, larger than the 128 MiB blob) before the handler runs. A rejected upload has already been received. Receive memory is capped only at the transport layer, by `MaxRecvMsgSize × streams × connections`, and none of those factors is bounded today.

This work adds three transport caps, as gRPC server options and a wrapped listener:

- **`MaxConcurrentStreams`** — limit in-flight RPCs per connection.

> - **Max connections** — a limiting listener caps total connections, so a peer cannot dodge the per-connection stream cap by opening many connections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **MaxConnections** — a limiting listener caps total connections, so a peer cannot dodge the per-connection stream cap by opening many connections.
```

> - **Keepalive** (`KeepaliveEnforcementPolicy`, `KeepaliveParams`) — drop idle or abusive connections and blunt slow-read holding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **KeepAlive** (`KeepaliveEnforcementPolicy`, `KeepaliveParams`) — drop idle or abusive connections and blunt slow-read holding.
```

Together these bound receive memory and connection load. With them plus the verifier pool, the application-level in-flight cap from the draft PR (#7481) is not needed here and is dropped. These are fixed, protocol-sane values, not derived from the disk budget.

### Configuration and tuning

The disk budget and the enable flag are the config inputs (`ServerConfig`, TOML and CLI). Rate and burst are derived from the budget (see Sizing), not set on their own. The limit can be raised as usage grows or turned off entirely, with no protocol change.

> The rate is meant to be a governance parameter, not free per-operator config, so that every validator uses the same value (see Consensus impact). Locally, an operator can still turn the limiter off, which only risks that node's own disk. What an operator must not do is set a lower rate than peers: that throttles blobs others accept and can deny the `>2/3` quorum.

Reviewer: This is for the implementation. I guess we shouldn't make it a config to disable the limiter. Instead, only provide a way to disable it using a CLI flag. This way, it's very explicit and no operator can forget that they have the limiter disabled and end up with unbounded disk usage

> The rate is meant to be a governance parameter, not free per-operator config, so that every validator uses the same value (see Consensus impact). Locally, an operator can still turn the limiter off, which only risks that node's own disk. What an operator must not do is set a lower rate than peers: that throttles blobs others accept and can deny the `2/3` quorum.

Reviewer: This is for the implementation. I guess we shouldn't make it a config to disable the limiter. Instead, only provide a way to disable it using a CLI flag. This way, it's very explicit and no operator can forget that they have the limiter disabled and end up with unbounded disk usage

So, we would only have a CLI to disable the limiter, all parameters should be onchain or derivable from values onchain

Author: added a CLI flag to disable limiter

## Alternative Approaches

The chosen design is Model 1 as the base, optional Model 4 for fairness, and reject-fast rejection (with a bounded queue left as a possible refinement). The options:

**Model 1 — global throughput (chosen).** One flat `UploadSize` bucket per validator. Bounds per-node disk automatically and in proportion to stake, keeps admission uniform, and is the simplest to build and remove. Weaknesses: no client isolation on its own, and a low-stake validator is metered by the full blob size even though it stores less.

**Model 2 — shard size × stake.** Charge the bytes each validator actually stores. This is the most direct disk accounting, but validators then charge different amounts for the same blob, so a blob can be admitted by some and rejected by others. That risks a split quorum and a non-deterministic signer set.

**Model 3 — PFF size × stake.** A flat charge with a per-validator budget scaled by stake. With a single network rate this is just Model 1 (assignment already makes disk stake-proportional). With truly per-validator budgets it brings back Model 2's split-quorum risk. No net gain.

> **Model 4 — per client / escrow / signer (chosen, deferred).** A per-signer, escrow-weighted bucket. Gives real client isolation, but cannot bound total disk on its own (it still needs the global cap) and adds per-signer state. Deferred until there is contention to justify it.

Reviewer 2: We need to be explicit here if rate limit i meant to bind in normal operation or under abuse.  Given that accounts are free and unlimited to be created, I think those models are not protecting against abuse

Reviewer: I don't think we should worry about this at the moment. It can be left for later

Reviewer 2: true, wanted to flag it so we are explicit that we are not solving abuse cases

Author: Made it explicit. The ADR now states the limiter bounds disk under any load, including a hostile client, but does not solve abuse

> **Model 5 — occupancy gating.** Admit based on current store size versus budget. The most direct disk enforcement, since a token bucket refills even when nothing is stored, but it needs live occupancy tracking and back-pressure and is burstier near the cap. A possible later refinement.

Reviewer 2: Model 5 looks simpliest to implement tbh

Author: ~~Won't we hit a split-quorum issue here? Occupancy is per-node local state (different pruning, restarts, history), so near the budget the same blob could be admitted by some nodes and rejected by others. The client could miss 2/3 even when the network has spare capacity, just because the specific validators it needs reach max disk cap at that moment.~~

Upd. double-checked and it looks like it's not that as big problem as I thought initially. The split is soft and only near the cap. Everyone gets the same proportional stream on the same prune window so occupancy tracks closely across nodes and the MinRowsPerValidator floor means the small validators saturate first.

Reviewer: 100% @vgonkivs, if we take the mainnet scenario, where 6 validators have > 33% of the staking power. Even if small validators have storage left, no quorum will be achieved if none of the top validators provided their signatures.
Also, it goes back to the same assumptions, with the current formula, we approximate the storage and limit it, we could use a hybrid approach where we use the storage size instead of the bucket to know how much more data a validator can server.

Thinking about this, we can explore how would using the formula with storage instead of the tokens bucket would look like and decide which approach is best. They both rely on the formula, just the limiting is based on the storage size. The obvious pro is Vlad's comment: https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-app/pull/7571#discussion_r3668133445 , so it's worth exploring

Author: Reworked the ADR to use occupancy/storage (Model 5), token bucket moved to Alternative Approaches

**Temporary hardcoded guard.** Rejected. The limiter is permanent, so a throwaway fixed rate (say a placeholder 10 MiB/s) is wasted work and starves easily. A conservative Model 1 setting covers the ramp-up just as well.

## Consequences

### Positive

- One permanent mechanism covers both the ramp-up and steady state.
- Disk is bounded, and the bound comes from a budget rather than a guess.
- A uniform charge keeps admission predictable and quorum-safe.
- Per-signer fairness can be added later without a redesign.
- The replay-drain hole is closed.
- Transport caps bound receive memory, which was unbounded, and remove the need for the draft PR's in-flight cap.

### Neutral

- Sizing does not depend on the model.
- Per-node disk scales with stake, which is intended: more stake, more commission.
- `upload_shard.admitted_bytes` (charged) and `upload_shard.bytes` (stored shard rows) measure different things.

> - No proto or consensus change; the limit is raised or disabled by config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The limit is changed via governance and can be disabled by config
```

### Negative

- Reject-fast needs a client change before clients depend on the limiter.
- Model 1 alone has no client fairness; that waits on the per-signer layer.
- A low-stake validator is metered by the full blob size.
- An over-budget reject costs the client a reroute; the queue that would soften it is deferred.

> - The download path stays unthrottled (out of scope).

Reviewer: maybe we could add that restarts can cause the buckets to temporarily account budgets incorrectly. It's expected anyway

# ADR 029: Fibre Upload Rate Limiting

## Changelog

- 2026-07-21: Initial draft

## Status

Proposed

## Context

Fibre is the off-chain, high-throughput DA path. A client erasure-codes a blob and
fans its rows out to validators; each validator's Fibre server receives its assigned
shard and writes it to local disk. The only ingress that grows that store is
`Server.UploadShard` (`fibre/server_upload.go:22` → `store.Put`, `:83`); prune and
reconcile only delete.

Nothing bounds upload throughput or disk growth today. The existing limits are
per-message size (`fibre/server.go:114-115`) and a GOMAXPROCS verifier pool
(`fibre/server_upload.go:281`); no `MaxConcurrentStreams` is set
(`fibre/internal/grpc/server.go:41`), so receive-buffer memory is effectively
unbounded.

> Shards expire. `pruneAt = max(creation + ShardRetention, ExpiresAt)`

Reviewer: probably missing a few words after `Shards expire`. Of I didn't get what the conveyed meaning is

(`fibre/server_upload.go:183`), where `ShardRetention = 4h` and
`ExpiresAt = creation + PaymentPromiseTimeout` with `PaymentPromiseTimeout = 1h`

> (`x/fibre/types/params.go:35`, `:28`; `x/fibre/keeper/keeper.go:329`), so effective

Reviewer: [nit]
probably it's better to remove the line numbers from the links because code evolves and very soon all the references won't be referencing the right code. It's better to only reference the file name IMO

retention is 4h; both are governance-tunable. A minute-interval loop enforces it
(`fibre/server_prune.go:8`). So **steady-state disk ≈ admitted rate × retention
window** — bounding the rate bounds the disk.

We need this for the 2026 ramp-up (run on mainnet without surprise disk growth) and
permanently (validators have fixed hardware and do not autoscale). It is a permanent
mechanism; a conservative early setting is just one operating point.

The open question is what the limiter meters and at what scope: (1) global network
throughput; (2) shard size × stake; (3) PFF (PayForFibre) / `UploadSize` size ×
stake; (4) per client / escrow / signer; (5) something else, e.g. occupancy gating.

> How the number itself is chosen (sizing) is a separate axis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The open question is what the limiter meters and at what scope: 

1. global network throughput; 
2. shard size × stake;
3. PFF (PayForFibre) / `UploadSize` size × stake; 
4. per client / escrow / signer; 
5. something else, e.g. occupancy gating.

How the number itself is chosen (sizing) is a separate axis.
```

also would be good to expand on what each of these mean. A sentence or two for each would make it clear even for people without enough context

  fraction `s` at `livenessThreshold = 1/3` (`fibre/validator/set.go:68`). A
  validator's shard, and its disk per blob, is proportional to its voting power.
- **Charge basis.** `UploadSize = originalRows × rowSize` (`fibre/blob.go:122`) is
  the padded original blob size, uniform across validators. A validator actually
  stores `min(1, 3s) × UploadSize` (its rows, proofs, RLC) — at most ~1× for
  `s ≥ 1/3`, not 4×; the 4× parity is a network aggregate, never on one node.
- **Client.** A client uploads to all validators and needs `>2/3` signatures.
  `ClientCache.Request` does not retry application errors
  (`fibre/internal/grpc/client_cache.go:117`), so rejections must not silently cost
  quorum.

### Requirements

- **R1** Bound per-node disk to a derivable budget over the retention window.
- **R2** New clients or higher usage must not break correctness or force a redesign.
  Fair isolation between clients is desirable but a separate question.
- **R3** Keep the `>2/3` quorum reachable under throttling.
- **R4** Simple, config-gated, tunable, removable — no protocol change.

### Out of scope

Throughput limiting in PrepareProposal/ProcessProposal (a goleveldb concern, and

> goleveldb is not near-term) and the read path (`DownloadShard`).

Reviewer: > a goleveldb concern, and goleveldb is not near-term

what does this mean?

## Decision

### Sizing — from a disk budget

The rate is a single protocol-wide value derived from a reference disk budget, not
hand-picked. A token bucket admits at most `burst + rate × T` over any interval `T`,
and shards live for the retention window, so per-node peak disk is:

> > `peak_disk = min(1, 3s) × (burst + rate × retention_window)`

Reviewer: if you could add a numerical example here, would be better so that reviewers don't need to do that on every review

For the reference (max-stake) validator this equals `reference_disk_budget`, giving
`rate = (reference_disk_budget − burst) / retention_window`, with
`burst ≥ MaxBlobSize` so any single blob fits. When `burst` is small relative to the
budget, `rate ≈ reference_disk_budget / retention_window`. Operators do not pick the
rate; they provision disk for their stake share. A single uniform rate across
validators is required (see Consensus impact).

### Model — global now, optional per-signer later

> **Model 1 (global throughput)** is the base: one per-validator token bucket charging

Reviewer: what does `1` mean here?

the flat `UploadSize`. It is chosen because per-node disk is *already* bounded and
stake-proportional by the stake-weighted assignment, so a flat global charge needs no
explicit weighting and keeps admission uniform — a validator cannot accept a blob its

> peers reject. Charging per-validator amounts (Models 2 and 3) breaks that uniformity

Reviewer: aah, does 2 and 3 refer to the ones defined at the begining? if that's the case, if you can also set these numbers in the name of the sections where each is explained, it would be better

nothing to protect against, and the global cap already guarantees the disk bound
regardless of client count. **Model 4** — a per-signer sub-limit under the same global
cap — is deferred until contention appears. Unlike the reject-fast client change,
adding it later is *non-breaking*: it is a transparent server-side sub-limit (clients
see the same `ResourceExhausted`), so there is no reason to pay its per-signer state,
escrow-weighting, and Sybil-policy cost before it is needed. Admission is gated by
escrow, not identity, so if contentious multi-client use is expected early, Model 4
moves into v1. Trade-offs for all models are in Alternative Approaches.

### Rejection — reject-fast, not block-and-wait

On over-budget, return `ResourceExhausted` with the computed delay as a retry-after
hint; the client waits or routes elsewhere. This avoids head-of-line blocking and
needs a client change (respect the hint, keep quorum). We make that change now: it is
non-breaking while Fibre has no users, and would be breaking once clients depend on
the server absorbing the wait.

## Detailed Design

### Mechanism

The limiter guards `UploadShard`, configured on `ServerConfig` (TOML + CLI flags,

> `fibre/server_config.go`, `fibre/cmd/start_cmd.go`); a no-op when disabled or

Reviewer: maybe we should discuss having these flags as gov params

Author: Agreed, the rate should be a gov param

  already stored — a replay of an accepted promise/shard must not drain the bucket.
  The bucket is charged strictly *after* a passing store-presence check, so the
  ordering is fixed: presence check → (miss) → charge → `store.Put`; a hit returns OK
  and never touches the bucket. This presence check is a prerequisite for this ADR's
  implementation. It relates to ADR-025 but does not depend on it: if ADR-025's
  promise cache lands, the store check may be served from it; if not, a direct cheap
  store lookup suffices. Either way the charge is gated on the same check, so a replay
  cannot drain the bucket regardless of which cache is present. Account against server
  time, never the client's `CreationTimestamp`.
- **Reject-fast.** `ResourceExhausted` plus a retry-after (a gRPC `RetryInfo`
  detail); no parked handlers.
- **Metrics.** `rate_limited` (by reason) and `admitted_bytes` counters
  (`fibre/server_metrics.go`); the existing `upload_shard.bytes` counts received
  shard bytes, distinct from charged `UploadSize`.

### Transport-level limits

The byte-rate limiter bounds disk, not memory. gRPC buffers each full `UploadShard`

> message (up to `MaxMessageSize ≈ 132 MiB`) before the handler runs, so a rejected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
message (up to `MaxMessageSize ≈ 132 MB`) before the handler runs, so a rejected
```

or probably it's better to use 128MiB

and a non-deterministic signer set.

**Model 3 — PFF size × stake.** Uniform charge, per-validator budget scaled by stake.
With a protocol-wide rate this *is* Model 1 (assignment already makes disk
stake-proportional); with per-validator budgets it reintroduces Model 2's
partial-quorum risk. No net gain.

**Model 4 — per client / escrow / signer (chosen hybrid).** Per-signer bucket,
escrow-weighted. Gives real client isolation and can track escrow, but does not bound
total disk alone (needs the global cap) and adds per-signer state; Sybil is mitigated
as described above.

**Model 5 — occupancy gating.** Admit on current store size vs budget. The most direct
disk enforcement (a token bucket refills even when nothing is stored), but needs live
occupancy accounting and back-pressure and is burstier near the cap. A possible later
refinement.

**Rejection — reject-fast vs block-and-wait.** Reject-fast avoids head-of-line
blocking and gives the client an actionable retry-after, at the cost of a client
change made now while non-breaking. Block-and-wait needs no client change today but
adds HOL blocking, unpredictable cross-validator latency, and entrenches a contract

> that is breaking to change later.

Reviewer 3: A single upload request takes roughly 20 ms, (irrc, @walldiss please correct me if that is wrong)

If a node rejects immediately, the request latency is no longer just those 20 ms. The client must receive the rejection, select another node, send a new request, and wait for that node to serve it. The newly selected node may also be overloaded, potentially causing multiple rounds of rejection and rerouting.

I do not think we need to choose strictly between blocking and rejection. A better policy is to use both. A bounded queue that briefly blocks requests while the estimated queueing delay is lower than the expected cost of rerouting, and reject once it exceeds that threshold.

For min-sized requests, a rough starting point would be
`max_queue_size < (RTT + client_overhead) / min_upload_latency`

For variable, this would scale with size, adjusted for the number of uploads the node can serve concurrently. 

More generally: accept when the estimated queueing delay is below the estimated rerouting delay; reject otherwise.

Reviewer: this makes sense 👍 thanks Hlib for continuing to support the project 🙏

Author: Fair, a reject that triggers a reroute (and possibly a cascade) can cost far more than the ~20ms upload.

I'd keep reject-fast as the base and treat the bounded queue as a deferred refinement, since the queue and the burst are substitutes — both absorb bursts — and we already size a large one (burst = rate × window/2, ≈341 GiB at a 1 TiB/4h budget). So the bucket rarely empties (instant admit, no queue), and when it does drain a max blob needs ~2.6s of tokens, well above the reroute cost, so the threshold rejects anyway. The band where queueing helps is a stream of small requests at the boundary.

There's also a cost, since the charge is after verify, a waiter is a parked handler holding its full ~128 MiB message and a stream slot, so we'd need a dedicated wait budget  effectively the in-flight cap.

I've captured your hybrid (queue rule, max_queue_size bound, parked-handler reasoning) as a deferred refinement in the ADR — to revisit if we pick a small burst or see that small-request pattern
